software/README.md, before:

# Software

This section of the [Wordclock project](../README.md) covers the software running on the clock's ESP32. This page covers the basic features and how to build and deploy from source.

For detailed usage instructions, please refer to the [User's Manual](UsersManual.md).

## Features

- Supports English, French, Italian and Dutch clock faces
- Web interface over WiFi with captive portal for initial WiFi configuration (see [User's manual](UsersManual.md) for details)
- Can use network time (NTP) or manual setting
- Interface offers various other options such as display color, light sensor sensitivity, and [OTA firmware update](#ota-update)
- [MQTT client](UsersManual.md#mqtt-client) to control the clock via home automation platforms such as [Home Assistant](https://www.home-assistant.io/)
- Go beyond time display with an experimental web interface for real-time [painting](UsersManual.md#paint)


## Demo video

[Here's a video](https://youtu.be/WF_X5soabm0) showing the Wordclock with 1.0 firmware and its web interface in action. New features were added since, such as MQTT and Paint.

## Release binaries

If you are not interested in modifying the source code, you can find prebuilt binaries [here](https://github.com/t0mg/wordclock/releases) that can be flashed on your ESP32 with [esptool.py](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esptool/en/latest/esp32/esptool/flashing-firmware.html).

## Build with PlatformIO

This is the recommended method as it makes it easy to manage dependencies and build for a specific flavor of ESP32. If you do not want to use PlatformIO, see [below](#deprecated-build-with-arduino-ide) for detailed instructions.

1. [Install PlatformIO and VS Code](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/integration/ide/pioide.html)
2. Load the project in VS Code (select the folder containing `platformio.ini`)
3. Verify that the target board in `platformio.ini` matches your ESP32 hardware
4. Build and upload

## OTA update

After the firwmare has been flashed over USB once, you can use the OTA feature to flash further updates: build the new binary file, then open the web portal of your clock, click the `Firmware update` link at the bottom and upload the new `.bin` file.

- Pre-built releases can be found [here](https://github.com/t0mg/wordclock/releases).
- In PatformIO, the build file is located in `.pio\build\<environment name>\firmware.bin`.
- If you are building with Arduino IDE, use `Sketch > Export compiled Binary` to export the file.

__Warning__: if the `firmware config version` displayed at the very bottom of the web interface changes, your settings will be reset. They should othewise remain.

## [Deprecated] Build with Arduino IDE

_**Note:** this project now relies on PlatformIO features such as board-specific configurations and [binary data embedding](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/platforms/espressif32.html#embedding-binary-data), and will therefore **require changes in the code and project files to build with the Arduino IDE**, which is why this section is considered deprecated._

### Add ESP32 boards

If you want to use Arduino IDE only, you need to install the [Arduino core for the ESP32](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32). To do so, the preferred method is to use the Boards Manager and is detailed [here](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/blob/master/docs/arduino-ide/boards_manager.md).

Once installed, select the ESP32 board from `Tools > Board > ESP32 Arduino > ESP32 Dev Module` (or whatever is most appropriate for your specific board).

You will also need to rename the `wordclock.cpp` file to `wordclock.ino`.

_Note: you might also need to install the appropriate USB driver for your ESP32 board (for example if it has a CP210x USB to UART bridge, it's [this one](https://www.silabs.com/developers/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers))._

### Add required dependencies

This project relies on several additional libraries that need to be installed in the Arduino IDE. Open the Library Manager (`Tools > Manage Libraries...`), then search an add the following:

- [RTClib](https://github.com/adafruit/RTClib) by Adafruit
- [IotWebConf](https://github.com/prampec/IotWebConf) by Balazs Kelemen
- [NeoPixelBus](https://github.com/Makuna/NeoPixelBus) by Michael C. Mille
- [arduino-mqtt](https://github.com/256dpi/arduino-mqtt) by Joël Gähwiler

You are now ready to compile and flash the `wordclock.ino` sketch.

## Credits

A large part of this source was based on the code from these two projects (both of which were written for the same hardware) with their explicit permission:
- https://github.com/e-noyau/wordclock (for the clockface and overall architecture)
- https://bitbucket.org/gliktaras/word-clock (for the configuration portal)

Commit message:

Add a pio target to merge the firmware binary and document it

software/README.md, after:

# Software

This section of the [Wordclock project](../README.md) covers the software running on the clock's ESP32. This page covers the basic features and how to build and deploy from source.

For detailed usage instructions, please refer to the [User's Manual](UsersManual.md).

## Features

- Supports English, French, Italian and Dutch clock faces
- Web interface over WiFi with captive portal for initial WiFi configuration (see [User's manual](UsersManual.md) for details)
- Can use network time (NTP) or manual setting
- Interface offers various other options such as display color, light sensor sensitivity, and [OTA firmware update](#ota-update)
- [MQTT client](UsersManual.md#mqtt-client) to control the clock via home automation platforms such as [Home Assistant](https://www.home-assistant.io/)
- Go beyond time display with an experimental web interface for real-time [painting](UsersManual.md#paint)


## Demo video

[Here's a video](https://youtu.be/WF_X5soabm0) showing the Wordclock with 1.0 firmware and its web interface in action. New features were added since, such as MQTT and Paint.

## Release binaries

If you are not interested in modifying the source code, you can find prebuilt binaries [here](https://github.com/t0mg/wordclock/releases) that can be flashed on your ESP32 with [esptool.py](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esptool/en/latest/esp32/esptool/flashing-firmware.html) or even directly from Chrome browser with [esptool-js](https://espressif.github.io/esptool-js/)

### Flashing with esptool-js

- Download the latest "merged.bin" firmware for your platform from the [release page](https://github.com/t0mg/wordclock/releases)
- Open [esptool-js](https://espressif.github.io/esptool-js/)
- Connect your ESP32 over USB
- Click "Connect" and select the correct COM port
- Click "Erase Flash" and let it do its thing
- Set Flash Address to 0
- Pick the file you downloaded
- Click "Program" and wait for the operation to complete
- Profit

## Build with PlatformIO

This is the recommended method as it makes it easy to manage dependencies and build for a specific flavor of ESP32. If you do not want to use PlatformIO, see [below](#deprecated-build-with-arduino-ide) for detailed instructions.

1. [Install PlatformIO and VS Code](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/integration/ide/pioide.html)
2. Load the project in VS Code (select the folder containing `platformio.ini`)
3. Verify that the target board in `platformio.ini` matches your ESP32 hardware
4. Build and upload

**Important**: Platform IO builds and flashes multiple bin files (bootloader, partition, firmware). To merge those into a single binary for flashing separately from e.g. esptool or the OTA updater, run `pio run -t mergebin` from a PlatformIO console and look the file ending with "merged.bin" in the `.pio/build` folder.

## OTA update

After the firwmare has been flashed over USB once, you can use the OTA feature to flash further updates: build the new binary file, then open the web portal of your clock, click the `Firmware update` link at the bottom and upload the new (merged, see above) `.bin` file.

- Pre-built releases can be found [here](https://github.com/t0mg/wordclock/releases).
- In PatformIO, the merged build file is located in `.pio\build\<environment name>\firmware_<environment name>_merged.bin`.
- If you are building with Arduino IDE, use `Sketch > Export compiled Binary` to export the file.

__Warning__: if the `firmware config version` displayed at the very bottom of the web interface changes, your settings will be reset. They should othewise remain.

## [Deprecated] Build with Arduino IDE

_**Note:** this project now relies on PlatformIO features such as board-specific configurations and [binary data embedding](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/platforms/espressif32.html#embedding-binary-data), and will therefore **require changes in the code and project files to build with the Arduino IDE**, which is why this section is considered deprecated._

### Add ESP32 boards

If you want to use Arduino IDE only, you need to install the [Arduino core for the ESP32](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32). To do so, the preferred method is to use the Boards Manager and is detailed [here](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/blob/master/docs/arduino-ide/boards_manager.md).

Once installed, select the ESP32 board from `Tools > Board > ESP32 Arduino > ESP32 Dev Module` (or whatever is most appropriate for your specific board).

You will also need to rename the `wordclock.cpp` file to `wordclock.ino`.

_Note: you might also need to install the appropriate USB driver for your ESP32 board (for example if it has a CP210x USB to UART bridge, it's [this one](https://www.silabs.com/developers/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers))._

### Add required dependencies

This project relies on several additional libraries that need to be installed in the Arduino IDE. Open the Library Manager (`Tools > Manage Libraries...`), then search an add the following:

- [RTClib](https://github.com/adafruit/RTClib) by Adafruit
- [IotWebConf](https://github.com/prampec/IotWebConf) by Balazs Kelemen
- [NeoPixelBus](https://github.com/Makuna/NeoPixelBus) by Michael C. Mille
- [arduino-mqtt](https://github.com/256dpi/arduino-mqtt) by Joël Gähwiler

You are now ready to compile and flash the `wordclock.ino` sketch.

## Credits

A large part of this source was based on the code from these two projects (both of which were written for the same hardware) with their explicit permission:
- https://github.com/e-noyau/wordclock (for the clockface and overall architecture)
- https://bitbucket.org/gliktaras/word-clock (for the configuration portal)
